#summary Building Gears for Safari

= Current Status =
Gears for Safari compiles and runs in the current repository, there are still bugs and we currently working on stabilizing the port. If you are not a developer, interested in contributing to the Safari port, it's recommended that you wait for an official release.

Gears for Safari requires OS X >=10.4 (Tiger or later) and Safari version 3.1.1 or better.  The Windows version of Safari is not supported at this time (see [http://code.google.com/p/gears/issues/detail?id=433 relevant entry in issue tracker]).

= Introduction =

The Safari port is implemented as an NPAPI plugin.  It currently has feature parity with other platform with the exception of the !FileSubmitter class.

= Components =

Gears for Safari is made up of two components:
  # !GearsEnabler - An Inputmanager installed in `/Library/InputManagers/` serves to load Gears at browser startup in order to activate HTTP Interception and install the 'Gears Settings...' menu item.
  # Gears.plugin - The actual NPAPI plugin, resides in `/Library/Internet Plugins/`.

= Building =
  # In a terminal window, navigate to the  `gears/` directory.
  # Type `make`.

= Installing =

If you have [http://s.sudre.free.fr/Software/Iceberg.html Iceberg] installed you will get a Gears.pkg package that you can double click to install.  Otherwise you can run the script under `tools/osx/install_gears.sh` which will install Gears for you. 

Another option is to install the components manually:
  # Copy `gears/bin-[dbg|opt]/Installers/Safari/Gears.plugin` to the `/Library/Internet Plug-Ins` folder.
  # Copy ``gears/bin-[dbg|opt]/Installers/Safari/GearsEnabler` to the `/Library/InputManagers` folder.  In order to get this to work correctly on OS X 10.5, you will need to set the permissions of GearsEnabler correctly, the `tools/osx/install_inputmanager.sh` script will do this for you.

= Testing =
After installing, you should restart Safari.  Go to the [http://gears.google.com Gears Homepage], this will indicated whether Gears is installed and what version is running.  In addition you will see the 'Gears Settings...' menu item under the Safari Application menu.  If you've compiled a debug build, Gears will print diagnostic messages to the console as it loads, you can use these to diagnose problems you may have with the Gears installation.

= Useful Scripts =
You can find some useful scripts related to Safari compilation in the `tools/osx/` directory.  Most of these can be run without arguments to print a usage message:
  * install_gears.sh - as noted above, this will install the plugin and !InputManager into the correct locations.
  * clean_gears.sh - Will uninstall Gears, note that the Gears Data located in `~/Library/Application Support/Google/` is *not* removed by this script.
  * m42iceberg.py & iceberg2m4.py - Scripts used for converting the .packproj.m4 files used to create installer packages to and from files that can be edited with the iceberg GUI, see `installer/safari/readme.txt` for more details.
  * install_inputmanager.sh - Installs the Gears InputManager and sets it's permissions correctly.

= XCode Project =
You can find an XCode project for compiling Gears at `tools/osx/gears.xcodeproject`.  This is included mainly for convenience for Mac Developers, the "official" releases of Gears are compiled via the Makefile.

= Breakpad =
Breakpad is only enabled for official builds, it will not work correctly if the file in `/Library/Internet Plugins` is an alias to the Gears.plugin file in your build directory rather than a copy.  Also, by default, Breakpad turns itself off when running Gears under a debugger.