#summary Building Google Gears on Windows

= Introduction =

This document describes how to build Google Gears for Firefox on Windows.  Most of the same process will also work for building for Internet Explorer, but you'll need a commercial version of Visual Studio for the ATL headers and libraries. 

= Building =

I installed the following to create the build environment:
  * Visual Studio Express - http://msdn.microsoft.com/vstudio/express/downloads/
  * Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2 - http://msdn.microsoft.com/vstudio/express/visualc/usingpsdk/
  * Wix 3.0.2925 - http://wix.sourceforge.net/downloadv3.html
  * Cygwin - www.cygwin.com
    * Make sure to install these packages:
      * All -> Archive -> zip
      * All -> Devel -> make
      * All -> Devel -> subversion
      * All -> Interpreters -> m4
      * All -> Python -> Python
    * Add your bin directory from Cygwin to your path

Follow the instructions at http://code.google.com/p/google-gears/source to set up your source tree

Finally open a command prompt, and set up your build environment:
  * This assumes that you put Gears in c:\svn-gears and installed VS Express and the Platform SDKs to their default locations.
  * Start -> Run -> cmd.exe
    # > cd \svn-gears\google-gears\gears\
    # > "c:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio 8\VC\vcvarsall.bat"
    # > "c:\Program Files\Microsoft Platform SDK for Windows Server 2003 R2\SetEnv.cmd"
    #  > make BROWSER=FF

This should give you a proper build for Firefox.  IE will fail unless you have a commercial version of Visual Studio installed, as it requires ATL.

= Installing =

You'll find the installers in bin-dbg\win32\installers\ from your Gears directory.
  * To install Gears for Firefox, open gears-win32-dbg-x.x.xx.x.xpi in Firefox.
  * To install Gears for Internet Explorer, right click on gears-win32-dbg-x.x.xx.x.msi and select "Install".

= Testing =
After installing, you should restart your browser.  Go to the Google Gears API [http://code.google.com/apis/gears/ page].  At the lower left corner, it should indicate the build of Google Gears that is active.  You should be able to try out the demos or create your own.



