#summary Examples of using Gears with various web frameworks.

= Using Gears with Your Web Framework =
Here are some links to tutorials and sample code to give you a jump start on using Gears in your project.

In addition to these examples, you'll probably want to take a look at the [http://code.google.com/apis/gears/ Developer Site] and [http://code.google.com/support/bin/topic.py?topic=11628 FAQ].

Contributions in new environments are welcome!
== PHP ==
  * [http://code.google.com/apis/gears/GoogleGears_SamplesAndTools.zip Gearpad] - A web-based notepad with offline support. The sample can be found in the `samples/gearpad` directory inside the zip file.
  * [http://www.onlamp.com/pub/a/onlamp/2007/06/28/the-power-of-google-gears-part-1.html The Power Of Google Gears] - A tutorial by Jack Herrington posted on O'Reilly.
  * [http://blog.assembleron.com/2007/05/31/google-gears-caching-of-wordpress-in-php/ Google Gears Caching of WordPress in PHP] - A really nice tutorial by Nick Halstead, who used gears to cach his blog for offline viewing.

== GWT ==
  * [http://wiki.apexdevnet.com/index.php/Building_Offline_Salesforce_Applications_with_Google_Gears_and_Google_Web_Toolkit Building Offline Salesforce Applications with Google Gears and Google Web Toolkit]. 

== .NET ==
  * [http://glazkov.com/blog/gears-asp-net-tutorial/ .NET on Gears: A Tutorial] - A time-sheet application in ASP.NET by Dimitri Glazkov.  Makes use of the new features in the 0.2 release.

== MS Silverlight ==
  * [http://nerddawg.blogspot.com/2007/06/google-gears-and-silverlight.html Google Gears and Silverlight].

Anyone up to writing a tutorial or example for these:
== Ruby On Rails ==
== Django ==