#summary API Changes Exposing ICU-Based Segmentation and Collation

= Introduction =

Fts and Gears in general need to expose functionality to let people write good offline i18n web apps.


= Details - Collation =

_Note, this is just a dump of text data, I'll be hacking it into place._

Collation is the part of sorting which indicates what order values should go in.  Something like `memcmp()` would be binary collation.  ASCII collation is very easy, for either case-sensitive or case-insensitive.  Various languages additionally need to collate accented characters correctly.  If you used binary collation, then 'o' and 'ô' might be widely separated in the output.  Lastly, some languages use Unicode characters which are not ordered at all lexographically.

See also http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collation and http://www.icu-project.org/userguide/Collate_Intro.html .



There are two collation cases we can do in ICU, general and
language-specific.  THIS DIFFERS FROM MY PRIOR STATEMENTS.  The ICU
module Dan Kennedy wrote for SQLite exposes this in a couple ways.
The case-mapping functions can be called as:

{{{
  SELECT lower('ABC'); -- 'abc'
  SELECT lower('I', 'en_us'); -- 'i'
  SELECT lower('I', 'tr_tr'); -- small dotless i
}}}

We can leave that in place.  For collation, you use a loader to name
things:

{{{
  SELECT icu_load_collation('tr_TR', 'turkish');
  CREATE TABLE t(
    a TEXT COLLATE turkish
  );
  SELECT x FROM y ORDER BY x COLLATE turkish;
}}}

I believe that there is a neutral table which could be the default
(perhaps an "icu" collation).  You'd use the SELECT version if you
have arbitrary data you want to sort, the CREATE version would provide
a default ordering for that column if you used it in ORDER BY, and
would also provide the ordering of any index on that column.

I propose adding a Gears Database function:

{{{
 db.sort(array);           // sort array in root locale
 db.sort(array, collator); // sort array using the given SQLite collator.
}}}

This function would be literally the same as:

{{{
  db.execute('CREATE TEMPORARY TABLE t (c TEXT COLLATE my_collator)');
  for (var ii = 0; ii < a.length; ++ii) {
    db.execute('INSERT INTO t VALUES (?)', [a[i]]);
  }
  var r = new Array(a.length);
  var rs = db.execute('SELECT c FROM t ORDER BY c');
  while (rs.isValidRow()) {
    r.push(rs.field(0));
  }
  rs.close();
  db.execute('DROP TEMPORARY TABLE t');
  return r;
}}}

The main difference is that db.sort() would call the collator
directly, and would use whatever refcounting tricks JavaScript allows
to make the output array efficient.

The canonical JavaScript style would be to pass a function to the
array.sort() method.  As of yet, I don't understand how this would
want to look, much less if it's possible.  I think that it would
require a Database function which returned a function, like:

{{{
  a.sort(db.sorter('Turkish'));
}}}

Is that doable?

Why is this hanging off of Database?  Because this feature provides
the same ordering as the database ORDER BY.  We could instead define
things the other way, saying that Gears has an
internationalized-ordering API, and that you can use that from the
database.  That probably implies that instead of calling
icu_load_collation() in a SQLite statement, we'd add something like:

{{{
 db.loadCollation(locale, collation_name).
}}}

TBD: Verify that we can really poke through and snag the SQLite
collators directly.  Currently I believe that it can be done without
too much SQLite hacking.

TBD: I'm not entirely sure about how collations are being named and
loaded, that might just be a SQLite wart.  It might be reasonable to
just have pre-defined collators like icu_en_us, and do on-demand data
loads.


= Details - Segmentation =

Segmentation is the process of breaking text up into words.  In English, you can usually get by using spaces and punctuation, though things like contractions can break this assumption.  Some languages, such as Japanese, do not have explicit word boundaries of this sort, and the grouping of characters into words is dependent on context.

See also http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Text_segmentation and http://www.icu-project.org/userguide/boundaryAnalysis.html .

For segmentation in fts, we provide a special column as follows:

{{{
 CREATE VIRTUAL TABLE t USING fts2(l LOCALE, content);
 INSERT INTO t (l, content) VALUES ('en_us', 'This is a test');
}}}

l would be a hidden column like rowid (and a RANKING proposal I put to
sqlite-users awhile back).  This means that when you do SELECT *, you
won't see the column.

Exposing at the Gears level would look like:

{{{
  db.split(s);      // Split using the root locale.
  db.split(s, l);   // Split using the given locale.
}}}

As with collation, it should be defined to provide the segmentation
which fts would use.  If you inserted db.split(s, l).join(' '), you'd
get the same exact hits for the document (though it might not be an
identical document, of course).

Again, I'm hanging it off Database because I'm designing from the
Database outward.  Again, we could easily invert the sense and have a
Gears API for segmentation, and define the Database segmentation as
matching _that_.

TBD: Hiddenness could be optional, like SQLite's existing HIDDEN
keyword.  I'm mixed on this, because this is metadata, not data.

TBD: Do we require a way to apply a specific locale as a hint to the
query?  Possibly.  If so, we could provide a MATCH alternative which
also adds the locale.  This would _not_ imply a localte MATCH, though,
that should be done using standard SQLite WHERE syntax.